
# First session

Today was my first session with a coach. This coach is also a therapist, which is something I was looking for too. However, she told me that I should choose between coaching, which is a short period, objective oriented, or psicoanalysis, which is longer and open ended.

I chose coaching, but coaching works over objectives. I don't really believe in objectives (more on that later), but let's play the game and see what happens. What she told me was that I should define where I was and what did I want. So let's do that:

Where am I

I am a young student, well, researcher (maybe I should change my self-description?) that has knowledge about plenty of things in life and is not that knowledgeable in others (like cooking, cleaning, etc.).

I have just read the wikipedia page on coaching and some of it on mentoring. Maybe mentoring is what I want, that is longer term. That could be one of the things to get.


There are many things I struggle with. I have many things in my head and I'm dangerously close to start having very bad memory again. Probably it was because it was too much information. One book a day is a lot of information! By the way, if I'm going to do it, then mabe it is useful to do the extra effort of sharing it.

I don't know if creating my personal brand is appropiate or I should create anonymous avatars or characters that explore every one of the different faces of me.

Javier Mason was one of them. But some people called me crazy and I lost many followers on instagram. Do I need followers? Maybe the goal of coaching is to understand better the answer to many questions.

What do I want? That's the first and very important question I have to answer. I may say that, today, as I'm feeling ok but not thathappy, I just want ... I have everything, I just would like to feel hapy, to stop feeling sad. There are a lot of things that make my intenal suffering state (which is _very_ mild, by the way). One of them is the fact that Raph broke my heart (was it her?). The second is the idea that I'm lost. And the third is that I'm abandoning my familie and my grandma(s) will die. I don't want ot go through that. I am sure it will fuck up my head.

At hte same time I can remember about my friend Irene, which is very often in crisis. I don't want ot be like her, in the sense of becoming comfortable in my circle. I put mself in this position for a reason, and even if I could change, I prefer not to. But the idea is not to make of myself a PhD student, like, a traditional one. I want to be excellent. I want to push further. There are a few things that come to mind, like working for reinasence technologies, twosigma, or whatever. I have the ability, I just have to put the output there.

I don't thing crisis or feeling sad is avoidable but I think this runs relatively in parallel with what I do with my life.

I think I could copy blinkist. But there are many pieces in the puzzle. 

Nowadays I'm being quite productive. Probably this is my productivity peak in my lifetime. But I have many objectives, questions and motivations.

Motivations:
- be much better than Raph so I can be sure I won't miss her or admire her.
- help the world
- be special
- have power
- achieve excellence

Ideals:
- work with people so to live longer and be happier. Moreover, work with people because it is them who will build the stuff.
- be free of noise. Have a free and peaceful mind
- be as healthy as possible
- have in mind than being unhealthy is possible and be in peace with it if it arrives
- be mature
- have habits that make me awesome
- be smart
- have great communication

Questions:
- should I follow a routine and schedule or just go through the day inventing what to do?
- should I sleep 9 hours a day or 7 is ok?
- where do I find excitement and motivation?
- should I pay people? How do I invest in myself?
- how should I administrate my memory? How should I cultivate it?
- between eating well, taking sun and a bath in the morning, meditating, reading in the night, having a social life, exercising, stretching, blinkist reading, writing down what I have done and my plans for tomorrow, consuming something that takes my emphaty up, what should I choose during my day? How can I manage all that?
- what is that that I should do to know which are the smart choices I should take?
- should I be strict with my sleep schedule?
- where will I be if I continue this path and what should I do to change my future? (answer: work a lot!)
- to which point the obsession of being better is useful or justified?
- how to motivate myself and what's the meaning I should find?
- how to keep feeling free? how to be satisfied with the things I achieve?




