# La France

The other day I asked a group of more than 10 foreigners: does any of you like France? My question was received with silence. No one likes France! - I concluded out loud, and no one contradicted such conclusion. We use to grin about this, but it's the kind of impure grin that conceals suffering. France is a harsh country but it has some good in it, and in this order the article will be organized.

## Presidentialism

The French political system is barely democratic. Napoleon arrived after the failure of the french revolution, when everything turned into chaos after a few nice progressive ideas arised in a context too economically tough for the unequal society of the time. Napoleon helped build independence and democracy in the same way Putin is now helping EU countries make the ecological transition and forget about COVID: his attacks to a debilitated Spanish kingdom enabled regions in Latin America to claim their independence. However powerful, Napoleon is still regarded as a capable emperor and many french are proud of having had him. This idea of a powerful emperor was diluted into a political system that held elections every 7 years (now 5), that chooses the president first and the parliment afterwards, and that involves a bunch of prefects who are direct subordinates of the president and control many things in each district, including (but not only) the police force. Many french people prefer strong leaderships over democracy but they are happy to call their system democratic even though decisions are taken in a pretty much top-down approach. 

Most recently, french voters chose between right and extreme right. 40% of the french voted for the extreme right. Coexisting with this 40% there are very demanding labor rights, which is a puzzling contradiciton. Of course, labor rights aren't that much respected inside law firms. During elections, the french can send someone else to vote for them: this is probably an option given to people that would prefer not to vote rather than to face the bureaucracy of chaning their address.

## Bureaucracy
We just mentioned bureaucracy. It has roughly two different definitions: i) _a system of government in which most of the important decisions are taken by state officials rather than by elected representatives_ and ii) _excessively complicated administrative procedure_. We'll now focus on the latter, although it's also true that public servants are extremely entitled. What to say? The administrative process is inefficient, meaning that simple things take an awful lot of time. VISA renewals are known to cause mental health issues for the unprivileged people that lack an EU citizenship. But even though being slow isn't bad per-se, in some french services the bureaucrats aren't allowed to process more than a specific number of documents per day. In other words, the French state is sometimes intentionally slow. This is one example of what could be called "absurdity" or more politely "lack of transparency". Instead of saying "we won't renew your visa", France just processes visas slowly, ignoring any timing, with the hope that foreigners leave. 

Bureaucracy in France isn't just slow but also arbitrary: the procedures aren't clearly defined and most times they depend on what the person on the other side of the desk feels like doing to your life. Bureaucrats bullshit people _a lot_. The smartest woman I know (roughly) is French and she developed the ability to argue very passionately to get the things she wanted and always carries around bullshit detector. She would often remind bureaucrats of the rules by reading them out loud. Bureaucrats would lie to you, be ignorant about how to handle all exceptional cases (which are a lot), and seem like going with the flow and wanting to enjoy the worklife without work that you disturb with your questions (as if you wanted to be there bothering them).

A free piece of advice in case you move to France: don't move too often. Find an overpriced appartment in Paris (they're easy to find) and don't move. Moving would mean interrupting all bureaucracy you're doing. Furthermore, if you move, you've to let everyone know that you're moving. French bureaucrats _love_ sending physical mails. They'd send them to your address. Verification codes included (as if SMSs were too new). In short, don't move. France isn't made for you to live in many different addresses. I heard of people changing appartment _inside_ the same building and still having a lot of problems. Now, imagine what happens when you move to another apartment in another department. French bureaucrats love real paperwork: in the rare ocassions they send you an email, it's for you to print the documents they gave you in digital format and send them via mail. Confirmation of reception? Oh, never. You'd better paid the post office to give you that, although such service doesn't ensure your documents to avoid a blackhole. One more detail: when budgeting the social services (family aid), the French state takes into account the amount of people that won't be able to access the aid because it's too complicated, which is a nice way to save public money and a beautiful incentive system.

Why doesn't this change? People that have power to push bureaucrats and improve the system also have enough power to avoid the problems of the system and as they don't suffer they don't care. The other reason is that there is plenty of bureaucracy in public services that, if you're rich, you don't have to suffer, because you're not supposed to access these aids in the first place. As a low-wage worker you are supposed to pay taxes, and part of them go to the aids you receive, provided you can navigate the bureaucrasea. This is, you pay them to get paid. One wonders when such people do these procedures because the only free days they have (numerous holidays) are also free for the bureaucrats and no call would be answered. The last detail to mention is that french bureaucracy is, well, in french.

## Language
La langue de Moliere. Hopefully you have grasped the spirit of France by now. Let's make it clearer:
> En 1694, dans les cahiers préparatoires du tout premier dictionnaire de l'Académie Française, il est écrit: « L'orthographe servira à distinguer les gens de lettres des ignorants et des simples femmes ».

In other words, the french language wasn't designed to be simple and efficient but to discriminate A people from B people. It wouldn't be nice to attack the high number of vowel sounds or try to explain how to pronounce the "r" (e.g. say "ARBRE"). Even the french conjugation is acceptable, french it's just veyr twisted latin. These things make the french language. But the ortograph intentionally designed to be complex and the use of too many letters to represent too few sounds (e.g. beaucoup=boku) are points to harshly critizise.

The second thing that should be criticized about the french language is how there is the written french, the formal french and the slang french and they are definitely not the same. Verbal and written somewhat differ in most languages, but this gap is particularly big in french. They write things they'd never say.  Je vous prie de croire, Madame, Monsieur, en l'assurance de ma plus haute considération.

## Classism and prestige
The french language serves to discriminate people. People that know how to speak and write vs. people that don't. To be honest, I haven't seen that much classism in France, this is way worse in countries like Chile (oh, I might confess I prefer France over Chile in this regard). However, there's some classism based in prestige. I studied in an École Normale Supérieure (ENS) and too many people are impressed when they hear that. Same for HEC, l'ENA, Polytechnique, etc. There are a few "elite" insitutions that give few people _prestige_. And this happens since primary school. Depending on the school you've been to you'd be accepted in a prestigious secondary school, then in a prestigious prepa, and if you got into a good prepa you'd be much better prepared to get into some of the institutions previously named. There's little flexibility. The only thing breaking the prestige chain is the competitive exam to get into a Grand École, but this exam can't avoid reproducing some of the original inequalities. Of course, people get different jobs and salaries depending on the school. This is formalized in RH tables inside companies, which is astonishing. Your abilities don't matter, your degree does. Is there any social mobility in this country? According to the publication in 2018 of the OECD's report «Is the Social Ladder broken? How can Social Mobility be promoted? », France scored badly: France has low social mobility, lower than that of the US. It seems that the welfare state has failed in this contry. 

## Paternalism, patriotism, colonialism, anti-musicality
Once I heard someone arguing that many African countries are poor because they inherited French bureaucracy. When the French left Senegal, they prohibited the new goverment to change the French law [colonialism, paternalism]. When covid came, France implemented intermittent lockdowns [paternalism]. France loves using the police to tell people to stop playing music in the street, closing parks at night and forbidding musical instruments in some during the day (e.g. luxembourg garden) [paternalism, anti-musicality]. French lawyers are not allowed to play music if they have any identifyiable lawyer item, because it would harm the dignity of the lawyer community [anti-musicality]. France had many colonies and still does! [colonialism], although of course la metropole (european france) is differentiated from the other parts of france. Many northern african countries have French as an official language [colonialism]. And the French love their language, their culture, and they think that speaking english isn't right and that people should speak french instead, argueably because leftists don't like the US and the right is nacionalist. This isn't an overstatement, when the UK left the European Union France proposed to make French the EU official language [patriotism]. Sadly, and although the other countries in the EU are of course very eager to speak french, the proposal was rejected for no good reason.

If you ever come to Paris from abroad, chances are that you'll arrive at Charles de Gaulle airport. This guy Charles was responsible of disguising english and US victories in WWII as french victories. I can't wrap my head around how France clearly lost WWI and WWII and french people still think they won. French people are extremely french-centered: at school, they read mostly french authors. A french friend told me some time ago that she was extremely surprised when she went to the US and realized that France wasn't the cultural center of the world. French are proud of their country and usually overestimate their place in the world, probably due to good diplomacy after lost wars. Environmentalists in France are obsessed about emissions in France when France isn't a top emiter and their emissions per capita are quite low, i.e. they want to greenwash France.

## Lack of user experience
French people don't like democracy (remember, they vote once every 5 to 7 years and give power to a strongman that can be reelected). They aren't used to ask users what they want. The obsession with small friction and user feedback that the US startups have doesn't exist in France. The french don't care about the user. If they did, the public administration wouldn't be what it is. Bureaucrats would be servants not lords. But the lack of UX is extended to everything. The banking system is run by boomers. If you want a french neobank (you should use Revolut instead) you need to previously have an account in a big old bank. Don't worry, you'll see them everywhere because they need people to go in person. French software is pretty bad. Honestly, it's surprising how bad the software is. It's a developed country with underdeveloped software (because they don't pay enough). Authentication services don't work. They just don't. Don't forget your password, you'll end up calling some french-speaking demotivated support employee. If you come to France and want to use public transport, buy a card, find a place to print a photo, stick the photo on the back of that card, and be careful before buying any travel subscription. If the package says "one month" remember it doesn't mean "one month" but "the current month". If you buy this package a 28th you'll have three very expensive days of unlimited transport. Same with weekly deals, the week ends on Sunday. Compare that with London's or NY's "just use your credit card" experience. Ah, and if you drive, expect all traffic lights to be red simultaneously for many seconds.

## Other values
France is very judgedamental. At my graduation ceremony we were told: exploit your singularity. How so? I asked to myself. This is not NY, where you can be in animal print and no one would even look at you. I was on a swimming short walking the seaside and the police told me to put my t-shirt on. The french educational system is _extremely_ time demanding. How can a kid "exploit her singularity" if she's obligued to do the same than the rest of their peers most of her time? Even at university, the way people have to compete is prestige: a good école, a good internship, a better internship, and so on. They don't have the opportunity to be better than the system because they're constantly in it. In fact, most people finish university with the same (little) amount of work experience, the only differentiator being where the interhships and the studies were done. France isn't diverse but on the contrary, quite rigid.

The French love putting heating outside in winter, but know nothing about AC. They probably know nothing about AC because "travaux" (interventions in the parisian century-old buildings) are very expensive. A lot of old people die due to heat waves (100+ only in Bordeau last summer). At the same time, many of the french are anti-nuclear. Now they have an energy crisis because they had dismantled three quarters of their nuclear power plants. As if they looked at what Germany did wrongly and decided to copy that. Don't take me wrong, nuclear waste is a problem that can and should be treated carefully, yet nuclear power is quite clean otherwise. Again, strange environmentalism. If you go to Cannes, expect most beaches to be private.

## Economy
France is interesting in that it has strong science, bad software engineering, the ability to import engineers from elsewhere, and the most profitable companies being in the lux market. But there are some other interesting phenomena: in many companies, engineers are not employed directly but indirectly, with some companies acting as a "buffer". An engineer is hired by small company X, works in projects and in the offices of big company Y, but gets paid little by X and Y pays X. Why is this? Because labor rights are strong and Y can not afford the bureaucracy of hiring and eventually firing their own workforce. What ends up happening is that company X pays lower salaries to engineers. Example of such companies are Thales or Airbus. Salaries are crazy low. A professor position, which is hard to get, pays less than a first year PhD student in the US. This is why many french go abroad. However, companies and universities pay quite a lot, more than double the salary, and the rest goes to the inefficient french administration and the social aid programs many people fail to access because of bureaucracy. Not everywhere in France, but in Paris, the cost of life is crazy high with respect to the salaries. Of course, France is heavily centralized. Everything goes through Paris, specially people, even inside the Paris region: from Guadalupe (the Caribean) it's cheaper to go to Paris than to any neighboring country.

# Good things about France
France has some nice things though, and not only the flag. The health system works quite well. Indeed, people get appointments using an app that is called Doctolib, which is a French unicorn, and one of the few apps that actually work (not being crazy complicated though) and pays ok to its employees. In France you even get one free full health scan every year! Without mentioning that going to the hospital is free. The public transport system exists and is quite efficient, when there're no strikes, someone jumps to the rails or leaves a forgotten bag making the fear-of-terrorism paralize the entire line. It's not convenient to have a car in Paris. The french have a good amount of holidays that are great for people that aren't as workaholic as myself. The minimum wage is relatively high and allows for an ok life if you aren't living in Paris. The workweek is 35 hours. There are some nice natural landscapes. They make good Croissants. French people are quite kind, contrary to common wisdom. They're open and interested, although it is sometimes hard to get through their politeness barrier. They have bikelanes. There museums are quite good (not the Louvre): the asian one, picasso, marmottan, orangerie, pompidou. Paris and Cannes, the two cities where I lived, were quite beautiful. Paris, in particular, has strict regulations for buildings that make it nice and expensive. The science (e.g. math) is quite good. The french managed to trick the world into buying from them clothing, luxury items, and parfumes, and they make big money out of it. In short, a lovely country with bureaucrats and good cheese.

